---
layout: post
tags: [Learning, Book Review]
series: How Learning Works
---

# Self-learning

Software has an idea called a ‘bus factor’. The bus factor is how many
people can be hit by a bus before the software can no longer ship. Bus
factors have many contributors. One of them is the team’s comfort in
learning independently.

I once worked at a company where there was always pressure to deliver
fast. Thus, I ended up giving answers to development questions rather
than helping developers find answers. This was faster at first, but it
ended up bogging down my time because they never learned to solve hard
problems independently. In fact, they still came to me with questions
even after I left the company.

The issue here is self-learning. **Learning is a skill like any other**.
It requires practice, feedback, and ways of organizing knowledge.

The component skills of self-learning are.

  - Assessing what needs to be done

  - Comparing current resources and abilities to the task

  - Plan an approach accounting for the task and current abilities

  - Evaluate effectiveness while applying the plan

  - Reflect and make changes based for future attempts

![self learning cycle](../../post-media/How-Learning-Works/self-learning-cycle.png)

These boil down to monitoring and controlling one’s own actions. In
Japanese culture, the process of constantly monitoring and making small
improvements is called *kaizen*.

I favor a variant of this process by Building a Discipling Culture
called the circle. It builds in accountability and feedback in addition
to personal monitoring and control.

![kairos circle](../../post-media/How-Learning-Works/kairos.png)

Research shows that masters spend proportionately much more time
planning an approach while novices tend to blindly apply whatever
approach they think of first. Further, more mature problem solvers will
recognize when an approach is failing and try a new one. Immature
problem solvers with try the same approach many times independent of the
result.

Kaizen, or metacognitive, process can be developed in students by asking
why questions and providing self-learning frameworks. This causes
students to reflect on their own processes and equips them to improve.

It is also important to address views on knowledge. Students perform
better when they see knowledge as malleable, as something that can be
intentionally improved. Statements of that paint knowledge as static
should be addressed (e.g. “I’m not good at math”, “Math isn’t my
subject”).

## Signs of failure 

  - Overdependence: things fall apart when you are away

  - Spend most of your time answering questions for a few

  - Frequently a bottleneck for efforts

  - Students/Employees are uncomfortable making decisions independently

## Tools

  - Why Questions: boundary cases, contrasting examples

  - Self-reflection: Prompt students to reflect on how they practice and
    learn. Perhaps compare against recommended strategies.

  - Learning Process Examples: the circle, 5-step learning loop

  - Exam Wrappers: When handing back an exam, have students fill out a
    brief reflective survey identifying trends in their errors, how they
    studied, and how they can improve practice strategies for next time.
    Hand them back before the next exam.

  - View on Knowledge: Make it clear that knowledge is malleable and can
    be intentionally improved

  - Interest curves: Vary the challenge. Alternate between building
    confidence and stretching abilities
