---
date: "2020-11-20T00:00:00Z"
draft: true
---

# PADL: Accessors
Accessors are trickier than other services in PADL. Concrete data relationships feel simple, but can quickly turn the application data into an inseparable ball of mud. Here we'll define rules to keep data separate and extensible like a true service should be.

This post will just be a summary. An in-depth analysis can be found in [Accessors: Services not Servants](../../posts/2021/2021-01-01-Accessors-Services-Not-Servants.md).

## The problem

Core entities of a domain will naturally connect to many other entities. Managing all entity relationsihps at the accessor allows connections to be concrete, but also forces all related entities to be managed by the same accessor. This quickly spirals out of control and almost all domain data is managed by one accessor.

The alternative is splitting accessors, but assuming related data is available at the store level. This violates the independence of services. It simply obfuscates that all the accessors depend on a shared data model. The accessors are in essense still one service because they cannot change independently.

Managing relationships at the accessor level also tends to encourage many variations of similar operations. Different callers naturally have different expectations for what data they require from a relationship hierarchy. Grabbing all the excess data can perform very poorly, especially when only a small subset of relationships are actually needed. Thus, varient operations are made for each flow's needs. The same principle applies for enforcing rules when saving data.

## Solution
The solution is to move relationships between some entities to a higher level of abstraction offered by each accessor. This often means tags are used to define relationships between entities in different accessors. Callers are then responsible for coordinating the relationships they expect.

## The rules
- There is one accessor for one core domain entity
- The accessor manages all data types that are naturally owned by the core type (e.g. a message naturally owns its attachments and they don't belong to anything else)
- All access to the entity sub-domain must go through the accessor
  - The accessor must expose the complete set of operations for the data sub-domain
  - Do not split entity logic across multiple accessors or provide "side-access" from another accessor
- The accessor owns all of it's own contracts, like any other service should
- Relationships to non-owned entities must be achieved through a generic mechanism such as tags
  - Relationship management between these sub-domains is a orchestration decision, which belongs managers. 
- All operations are defined relative to the entity, not the caller
  - All operations are "atomic actions" that represent a complete conceptual action


## What about performance?

Cache-friendly systems are performant systems. The ports of each caller make an ideal point for caching. They return the exact data needed for the workflow. Caching invalidation rules can also be optimized per workflow. Focused port definitions could even allow caching to be implemented as a generic wrapper.

A few extra remote calls will be out weighed in the long term by ease of caching.

## What about transactions?

This is potentially the biggest system performance gain. Leaning on data store transactions pushes the system to assume immediate consistency. Immediate consistency is rarely actually needed and hampers both scalability and responsiveness. 

Moving transactions to a higher level requires us to think about what our transactions *should* be from a domain perspective. Often they can be handled with eventual consistency, or even flagged for human intervention. 


## Summary

Accessors must be treated as true services that draw hard boundaries. This pushes many domain relationships higher in the call chain. While unintuitive, it actually improves flexibility, better represents the domain, and facillitates long-term performance.

Read [Accessors: Services not Servants](../../posts/2021/2021-01-01-Accessors-Services-Not-Servants.md) for a more in-depth analysis.